.. _filters.pclblock:

===============================================================================
filters.pclblock
===============================================================================

The **PCL Block filter** allows users to specify a block of Point Cloud Library
(`PCL`_) operations on a PDAL ``PointView``, applying the necessary conversions
between PDAL and PCL point cloud representations.

The PCL Block
filter creates a PCL pipeline object and passes it a single argument, the
JSON file containing the PCL block definition. After filtering, the resulting
indices can be retrieved and used to create a new PDAL ``PointView`` containing
only those points that passed the filtering stages.

At this stage in its development, the PCL pipeline does not allow complex
operations that may change the point type (e.g., ``PointXYZ`` to
``PointNormal``) or alter points.  We will continue to look into use cases that
are of value and feasible, but for now are limited primarily to PCL functions
that filter or segment the point cloud, returning a list of indices of the
filtered points (e.g., ground or object, noise or signal). The main reason for
this design decision is that we want to avoid converting all ``PointView``
dimensions to the PCL ``PointCloud``. In the case of an LAS reader, we may very
well not want to operate on fields such as ``ReturnNumber``, but we do not
want to
lose this information post PCL filtering. The easy solution is to simply retain
the index between the ``PointView`` and ``PointCloud`` objects and update as
necessary.

.. note::

    Most of the functionality of this filter has been superceded by native
    PDAL filters that re-implement the functionality of the supported PCL
    filters.

.. seealso::

    See :ref:`pcl_block_tutorial` for more on using the PCL Block including
    examples.

    See :ref:`pcl_json_specification` for complete details on the PCL Block
    JSON syntax and the filters available.

.. _`PCL`: http://www.pointclouds.org

.. plugin::


Implemented Filters
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The list of PCL filters that are accessible through the PCL Block depends on PCL
itself. PDAL is rather dumb in this respect, merely converting the PDAL
``PointView`` to a PCL ``PointCloud`` object and passing the JSON filename. The
parsing of the JSON file and implementation of the PCL filters is entirely
embedded within the PCL pipeline.

A summary of the currently available filters is listed below. For full details
of the filters and their parameters, see the :ref:`pcl_json_specification`.

ApproximateProgressiveMorphologicalFilter
    faster (and potentially less accurate) version of the
    **ProgressiveMorphologicalFilter**

GridMinimum
    assembles a local 2D grid over a given PointCloud, then downsamples the data

PassThrough
    allows the user to set min/max bounds on one dimension of the data

ProgressiveMorphologicalFilter
    removes nonground points to produce a bare-earth point cloud

RadiusOutlierRemoval
    removes outliers if the number of neighbors in a certain search radius is
    smaller than a given K

StatisticalOutlierRemoval
    uses point neighborhood statistics to filter outlier data

VoxelGrid
    assembles a local 3D grid over a given PointCloud, then downsamples and
    filters the data


Adding a New Filter
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Adding a new PCL filter to the PCLBlock ecosystem is mostly a process of
judicious copying and pasting.

1. Add the filter function declaration of the form ``applyMyFilter`` to
   ``PCLPipeline.h``.

2. Add the implementation of ``applyMyFilter`` to ``PCLPipeline.hpp``.

3. Add a one-line description of the shiny new filter to this file,
   ``filters.pclblock.rst``.

4. Add a full description of the new filter to :ref:`pcl_spec.rst
   <pcl_json_specification>`, including example JSON, all parameters, and
   default settings.

5. Add a test to ``PCLBlockFilterTest.cpp``. Make sure each parameter is
   independently verified.

Example
-------

The PCL Block json object describes the filter chain to be constructed within
PCL. Here is an example:

.. code-block:: json

    [
        {
            "name": "FilterOne",
            "setFooParameter": "value"
        },
        {
            "name": "FilterTwo",
            "setBarParameter": false,
            "setBounds":
            {
                "upper": 42,
                "lower": 17
            }
        }
    ]


Options
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

filename
  Path to external PCL JSON file describing the pipeline

methods
  Raw PCL JSON array describing the pipeline

